---
layout: post
title: "Codeforces 992 (Div. 2) Problem C"
modified:
categories: blog
excerpt: "An interesting problem that involves permutations and bit strings."
tags: ["algorithms", "problem-solving", "codeforces"]
comments: true
share: true
---

Codeforces Round 992 (Div. 2) [C. Ordered Permutations](https://codeforces.com/contest/2040/problem/C).

## The problem statement

The problem starts by defining the following function for any permutation of integers $$1$$ to $$n$$:

$$S(p) = \sum_{1 \leq l \leq r \leq n} \min(p_l, p_{l+1}, \dots , p_{r})$$

The function is actually the _sum of the minimum elements of all possible subarrays of a permutation $$p$$._

For a given $$n$$, the problem asks to _find the $$k$$-th permutation in lexicographical order among the permutations giving the maximum or report that there is none._

## Permutations yielding maximum $$S(p)$$

The first task is to identify the permutations that yield the maximum value of $$S(p)$$. Let's observe some permutations for $$n = 3$$.

| Permutation   | Subarrays | $$S(p)$$ values | Sum of $$S(p)$$s | 
|---------------|-----------|-----------------|------------------|
| $$[1, 2, 3]$$ | $$[1], [1, 2], [1, 2, 3]$$<br>$$[2], [2, 3]$$<br>$$[3]$$ | $$1, 1, 1$$<br>$$2, 2$$<br>$$3$$ | $$10$$
| $$[1, 3, 2]$$ | $$[1], [1, 3], [1, 3, 2]$$<br>$$[3], [3, 2]$$<br>$$[2]$$ | $$1, 1, 1$$<br>$$3, 2$$<br>$$2$$ | $$10$$
| $$[2, 1, 3]$$ | $$[2], [2, 1], [2, 1, 3]$$<br>$$[1], [1, 3]$$<br>$$[3]$$ | $$2, 1, 1$$<br>$$1, 1$$<br>$$3$$ | $$9$$
| $$[2, 3, 1]$$ | $$[2], [2, 3], [2, 3, 1]$$<br>$$[3], [3, 1]$$<br>$$[1]$$ | $$2, 2, 1$$<br>$$3, 1$$<br>$$1$$ | $$10$$

Here, the maximum sum is $$10$$, achieved only by the permutations $$[1, 2, 3]$$, $$[1, 3, 2]$$, and $$[2, 3, 1]$$. Now, what is the characteristic of these permutations?

The first clue comes from observing the position of $$1$$ in the permutations. Notice that in the maximum sum permutations, $$1$$ is always either at the beginning or at the end. It is because _if $$1$$ is in the middle, it occurs as the minimum value in more subarrays, reducing the overall sum._

If this is the case for the smallest element $$1$$ in the overall permutation, the same must be the case for the next smallest element $$2$$ in the remaining subarray. Observing the permutations above confirms the fact. The rule generalizes to the following: **each element is either at the beginning or at the end of the subarray.**

## Counting the permutations

Each element can be either at the beginning or at the end, that is, there are _two choices for each element, except the last one, because the last element's position is determined by the rest_. That naturally alludes to binary representation. Therefore, there are total $$2^{n-1}$$ permutations that gives the maximum value of $$S(p)$$.

## Finding the $$k$$-th permutation

Then comes the question of finding the ordering of these permutations, if there are any. Let's again observe the permutations for $$n = 3$$, juxtaposed against their binary encodings.

| Permutation | Binary Encoding | Explanation
|-------------|-----------------|-------------
| `[1, 2, 3]` | `0 0 0` | All elements remain in their positions.
| `[1, 3, 2]` | `0 1 0` | The second element in the subarrary `[2, 3]` moved to the end.
| `[2, 3, 1]` | `1 0 0` | Only the first element moved to the end; remaining subarray `[2, 3]` remains the same.
| `[3, 2, 1]` | `1 1 0` | Both the first and second elements moved to the end.

Notice that the binary encoding in increasing order also gives the lexicographical ordering of the permutations. It is because **in lexicographical ordering, the last, or least significant, positions change earlier and more often, and the first, or most significant, positions change later and less often.** Just like how bits change in binary counting in increasing order.

## Caveats

* For any given $$n$$, there can be $$2^{n-1}$$ permutations yielding the maximum sum. If $$k$$ is greater than that, the permutation doesn't exist.
* Checking for $$k$$ needs bit additional care, because $$2^{n-1}$$ will overflow as the bound of $$n$$ $$2 × 10^{5}$$ is very large. For $$n > 40$$ the number of desired permutations ($$1,099,511,627,776$$ close to $$10^{12}$$) exceeds the bound of $$k$$ ($$10^{12}$$). Therefore, the check $$k < 2^{n-1}$$ is necessary only for $$n < 40$$.

## Implementation

Here is [my implementation](https://pastes.io/online-c-c) incorporating the ideas above in C++.
